* How GDB Debugs?

GDB allows you to run the program up to a certain point, then stop and print out the values of certain variables at that point, or step through the program one line at a time and print out the values of each variable after executing each line.

-> GDB can help you in finding out memory leakage related bugs, but can't detect memory leakages.
-> GDB cannot be used for programs that compile with errors and it does not help in fixing those errors.
 
* compile with -g flag
$gcc -g hello.cc -o hello 

$gdb hello.out
	opens GDB with this file

r (run)
r arg1 arg2
r < file1

help

q -Quit GDB




* Stepping through Code

Stepping lets you trace the path of your program, and zero in on the code that is crashing or returning invalid input.

    l

    l 50

    l myfunction

        Lists 10 lines of source code for current line (l), a specific line (l 50), or for a function (l myfunction).

    next

        Runs the program until next line, then pauses. If the current line is a function, it executes the entire function, then pauses. next is good for walking through your code quickly.

    step

        Runs the next instruction, not line. If the current instruction is setting a variable, it is the same as next. If it’s a function, it will jump into the function, execute the first statement, then pause. step is good for diving into the details of your code.

    finish

        Finishes executing the current function, then pause (also called step out). Useful if you accidentally stepped into a function.




* Breakpoints or Watchpoints

Breakpoints play an important role in debugging. They pause (break) a program when it reaches a certain point. You can examine and change variables and resume execution. This is helpful when some input failure occurs, or inputs are to be tested.

    break 45

    break myfunction
        Sets a breakpoint at line 45, or at myfunction. The program will pause when it reaches the breakpoint.

    watch x == 3

        Sets a watchpoint, which pauses the program when a condition changes (when x == 3 changes). Watchpoints are great for certain inputs (myPtr != NULL) without having to break on every function call.

    continue

        Resumes execution after being paused by a breakpoint/watchpoint. The program will continue until it hits the next breakpoint/watchpoint.

    delete N
        Deletes breakpoint N (breakpoints are numbered when created).




* Setting Variables

Viewing and changing variables at runtime is a critical part of debugging. Try providing invalid inputs to functions or running other test cases to find the root cause of problems. Typically, you will view/set variables when the program is paused.

    print x

        Prints current value of variable x. Being able to use the original variable names is why the (-g) flag is needed; programs compiled regularly have this information removed.

    set x = 3

    set x = y
        Sets x to a set value (3) or to another variable (y)

    call myfunction()

    call myotherfunction(x)

    call strlen(mystring)

        Calls user-defined or system functions. This is extremely useful, but beware of calling buggy functions.

    display x

        Constantly displays the value of variable x, which is shown after every step or pause. Useful if you are constantly checking for a certain value.

    undisplay x
        Removes the constant display of a variable displayed by display command.





* Backtrace and Changing Frames

A stack is a list of the current function calls - it shows you where you are in the program. A frame stores the details of a single function call, such as the arguments.

    bt

        Backtraces or prints the current function stack to show where you are in the current program. If main calls function a(), which calls b(), which calls c(), the backtrace is

    c <= current location 
    b 
    a 
    main 

    up

    down

        Move to the next frame up or down in the function stack. If you are in c, you can move to b or a to examine local variables.

    return
        Returns from current function.





* Handling Signals

Signals are messages thrown after certain events, such as a timer or error. GDB may pause when it encounters a signal; you may wish to ignore them instead.

    handle [signalname] [action]

    handle SIGUSR1 nostop

    handle SIGUSR1 noprint

    handle SIGUSR1 ignore

        Instruct GDB to ignore a certain signal (SIGUSR1) when it occurs. There are varying levels of ignoring.


